blog: mocking a production api (#132)
getsynth/synth: docs/blog/2021-09-07-mocking-a-production-api.md

# So you want to mock a production API

API mocking refers to the process of simulating the behaviour of a real API
using a fake replacement.

There are many great use-cases for API mocking. You may for exaple want to mock

> and API to eliminate development dependencies between engineering teams. If a

Reviewer: > and API

Should be "an".

could get. We wanted to prototype a solution over (roughly) 5 days as a side
project - this blog post is an overview of that journey.

## Day 1: Picking an API

So much to do - so little time. We had decided we wanted to mock a popular API
but didn't know where to start. We knew companies like Stripe have an
excellent [testmode](TODO]) and even an open source http server which you can
use instead.

We decided to ask the internet 'Which API have you been struggling to test
against' on various forums like Reddit, HN and others. Ok so now we wait and see
let's see what the internet has to say.

## Day 2: Choosing Shopify

Surprisingly (or perhaps not) the internet responded. A bunch of people
responded and primarily complained about payment processors (except for Stripe
which was explicitly praised yet again!). A few products and companies came up
repeatedly as being a nightmare to test against. We qualitatively evaluated the
internet's feedback and reviewed documentation from the different APIs mentioned
for ease of implementation (we had 3.5 days left so we couldn't pick anything
too big). In the end we decided to go with the Shopify API!

> // TODO write more here about listening to user feedback

Reviewer: TODO

example Event can be seen below:

```json
{
    "arguments": "Ipod Nano - 8GB",
    // Refers to a certain event and its resources.
    "body": null,
    // A text field containing information about the event.,
    "created_at": "2015-04-20T08:33:57-11:00",
    // The date and time (ISO 8601 format) when the event was created.
    "id": 164748010,
    // The ID of the event.
    "desciption": "Received a new order",
    // A human readable description of the event.
    "path": "/admin/orders/406514653/transactions/#1145",
    // A relative URL to the resource the event is for, if applicable.
    "message": "Received a new order",
    // A human readable description of the event. Can contain some HTML formatting.
    "subject_id": 406514653,
    // The ID of the resource that generated the event.
    "subject_type": "Order",
    // The type of the resource that generated the event.
    "verb": "confirmed"
    // The type of event that occurred. 
}
```

Off the bat it's clear that there is some business logic that needs to be
implemented. For example, there is some notion of causality, i.e. an `Order`
cannot be `closed` before its been `placed`. This non-trivial business logic was

> good news - it means we can piggy back off some of the complex data generation

Reviewer: I don't understand this sentence. Because it is non-trivial you can piggy back off synth?

logic that's built into Synth.

> Since we don't have access to the code that Runs the Shopify API, we have to

Reviewer: > that Runs the

Not capitalized

simulate the behaviour of the data model. There are varying degrees of depth

> into which you can go, and we broke it into 4 levels:

Reviewer: > ... you can go ...

We or you?

> 1. Level 1 - **Stub**: Level 1 is just about exposing and endpoint where the

Reviewer: > and

Should be an

   data on a per element basis 'looks' right. You have the correct types, but
   you don't really care about correctness across elements. For example you care
   that `path` has the correct `subject_id` in the URI, but you don't care that
   a given Order goes from `placed` to `closed` to `re_opened`etc...

> 2. Level 2 - **Mock**: Level 2 involves maintaining the semantics of the Events

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Level 2 - **Mock**: Level 2 involves maintaining relations between some of the Events
```

>    collection. For example `created_at` should be monotonically increasing as it

Reviewer: > For example `created_at` should be monotonically increasing as it

I am not sure I understand what that means.

   follows `id`. `verb`s should follow proper causality (as per the order
   example above). etc.
3. Level 3 - **Emulate**: Level 3 is about maintaining semantics across
   endpoints. For example creating an order in a different Shopify API endpoint
   should create an `order_placed` event in the Events API.
4. Level 4 - **Simulate**: Here you are basically reverse engineering all the
   business logic of the API. It should be indistinguisable from the real thing.

Really these levels can be seen as increasing in scope as you go simulate
semantics per-element, per-endpoint, cross-endpoint and finally for the entire
API.

> ### 2. The Endpoint Behaviour

Reviewer: Maybe you should mention we have chosen the REST API, but they have others?

> The Events API is not a naive CRUD system. The endpoint exposes various query

Reviewer: I thought it was. The REST endpoints only has getters with, as you say after, filters.

> parameters (which are basically filters) which alter the response body. Luckly

Reviewer: > Luckly

Should be luckily.

> the Events API has simple behaviour, and as long as their implementation stays

Reviewer: > as long as their implementation stays

... as long as the implementation stays ... ?

true to the description it should be easy to emulate:

> ```

Reviewer: Maybe a word about where this comes from? Is that the request, the response?

started JSON server - and it worked!

Well almost; we were initially excited by the fact that it did exactly what is
said on the tin and very well, however it didn't have an easy way to specify the
custom query parameters we needed to faithfully reproduce the API like returning
results before or after a given `created_at` timestamp (feel free to let us know
if we missed something here!).

So we needed something a little more sophisticated. The internet came to the
rescue again with a comprehensive
[list](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_API_simulation_tools) of API
simulation tools. The basic precondition we had was that the API simulator had
to be OSS with a permissive license we could build on. This immediately
disqualified 50% of the available solutions, and we did a divide and conquer
exercise quickly evaluating the rest.

![Api Simulation Tools](media/api-simulation-tools.png)

The remaining tools were either not built for this purpose, or they were
incredibly complex pieces of software that would take a while to get acquainted
with.

In the end we decided to implement the endpoint functionality ourselves - we

> figured that a 50 LOC NodeJS server would do a fine job for a POC.

Reviewer: node/express

...
{
    "arguments": "generate virtual platforms",
    "body": null,
    "created_at": "2019-09-17T14:16:47",
    "description": "Received new order",
    "id": 477306,
    "message": "Received new order",
    "path": "/admin/orders/83672/transactions/#6020",
    "subject_id": 1352997,
    "subject_type": "Order",
    "verb": "closed"
},
{
"arguments": "innovate best-of-breed schemas",
"body": null,
"created_at": "2017-05-20T00:04:41",
"description": "Received new order",
"id": 370051,
"message": "Received new order",
"path": "/admin/orders/82607/transactions/#9154",
"subject_id": 1226112,
"subject_type": "Order",
"verb": "sale_pending"
},
{
"arguments": "incentivize scalable mindshare",
"body": null,
"created_at": "2018-02-21T12:51:36",
"description": "Received new order",
"id": 599084,
"message": "Received new order",
"path": "/admin/orders/01984/transactions/#3595",
"subject_id": 1050540,
"subject_type": "Order",
"verb": "placed"
}
...
```

We then dumped it all in a MongoDB collection with the one-liner:

```bash
$ synth generate shopify --to mongodb://localhost:27017/shopify --size 40000
```

Next step is to re-create the Events API endpoint.

### 2. Creating the API

> @brokad

Reviewer: Maybe you can fill in the gaps for this: we just wrote a prisma model for the responses and it worked OOB with the data with dumped into mongo. Then we just wrote a quick and dirty express server that maps the REST endpoint's querystring into a query for prisma.

between goals 1 and 2.

There were 6 steps to getting this thing over the line:
1. Start with the MongoDB base image. This gives us a Linux environment and 
   a database.
2. Download and install NodeJS runtime in the container.
3. Download and install Synth in the container.
4. Copy the javacript sources over & the Synth data model
5. Write a small [ENTRYPOINT](TODO) [shell script](TODO_PATH_TO_OUR_SCRIPT) 
   to start the `mongod`, server and generate data into the server
6. Expose port 3000

And we're done! We've ~~hackily~~ happilly packaged our mock API in a 
platform agnostic one liner.

## Was it a success?

An important aspect of this experiment was to see if we could conceive, 
research, design and implement a PoC in a week (on the side, we were working 
on Synth at the same time). And I can safely say this was a success! We got 
it done to spec. An interesting thing to note is that **60%** of the time was 
spent on ideating, researching and planning - and only 40% of the time on the actual 
implementation. However spending all that time before writing code 
definitely saved a bunch of time, and if we didn't the project would have 
overshot or failed.

> Now if the PoC itself was a success is a different question. This is where 

Reviewer: Maybe you can elaborate on this? Give a few one-liners, we push the image to GCP or dockerhub and people can just pull and get started?

Also note the data model is overly simplistic and likely needs tweaking and improvements so it'd be nice to point people in the direction of the repo to get some help improving it.

---
title: So you want to mock an API 
author: Christos Hadjiaslanis 
author_title: Founder 
author_url: https://github.com/getsynth
author_image_url: https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/14791384?s=460&v=4
tags: [synth, prisma, testing, mocking, story]
description: This post covers three different ways to generate test data for

> your Postgres database image: https://i.imgur.com/mErPwqL.png

Reviewer: Will error out

We wanted to apply our data generation engine to mocking a subset of a popular
API and see how far we could go. We set out to prototype a solution over (roughly)
5 days as a side project - this blog post is an overview of that journey.

## Day 1: Picking an API

So much to do, so little time. We decided we wanted to mock a popular API
but didn't know where to start. Companies like Stripe have an
excellent [testmode](https://stripe.com/docs/testing) and even
an [open source http server](https://github.com/stripe/stripe-mock) which you
can use instead.

We decided to ask the internet 'Which API have you been struggling to test
against' on various forums like Reddit, HN and others. Ok so now we wait and see
let's see what the internet has to say.

## Day 2: Choosing Shopify

Lo and behold! the internet responded. A bunch of people responded and primarily
complained about payment processors (except for Stripe which was explicitly
praised yet again!). A few products and companies came up repeatedly as being
difficult to test against. We qualitatively evaluated the internet's feedback
and reviewed documentation from the different APIs mentioned to understand 

> the implementation complexity. After all we had 3.5 days left ,so we couldn't 

Reviewer: Typo

simulation tools. The basic precondition we had was that the API simulator had
to be OSS with a permissive license we could build on. This immediately
disqualified 50% of the available solutions, and we did a divide and conquer
exercise quickly evaluating the rest.

![Api Simulation Tools](media/api-simulation-tools.png)

The remaining tools were either not built for this purpose, or they were
incredibly complex pieces of software that would take a while to get acquainted
with.

In the end we decided to implement the endpoint functionality ourselves - we
figured that a 50 LOC node/express server would do a fine job for a POC.

## Day 4: Implementing the core functionality

Day 4 was the most straight forward. Let's get this thing to work!

### 1. The Data Model

We decided to reproduce the API at level 1-2 since we didn't really have any
other endpoints. We used [synth](https://github.com/getsynth/synth) to quickly
whip up
a [data model](https://github.com/getsynth/model-repository/blob/main/shopify/shopify/events.json.json)
that generates data that looks like responses from the Event API. I won't go 
into depth on
how this works here as it's been covered

> in [other posts](2021-08-31-seeding-databases-tutorial.md). In about 15 minutes

Reviewer: Sounds like it takes 15 minutes to generate 10mb :smile:

        "subject_id": 1226112,
        "subject_type": "Order",
        "verb": "sale_pending"
    },
    {
        "arguments": "incentivize scalable mindshare",
        "body": null,
        "created_at": "2018-02-21T12:51:36",
        "description": "Received new order",
        "id": 599084,
        "message": "Received new order",
        "path": "/admin/orders/01984/transactions/#3595",
        "subject_id": 1050540,
        "subject_type": "Order",
        "verb": "placed"
    }
]
```

We then dumped it all in a MongoDB collection with the one-liner:

```bash
$ synth generate shopify --to mongodb://localhost:27017/shopify --size 40000
```

Next step is to re-create the Event API endpoint.

### 2. Creating the API

Creating the API was pretty straightforward. We wrote
a [prisma](https://www.prisma.io/) [model](https://github.com/getsynth/model-repository/blob/main/shopify/prisma/schema.prisma)
for the responses which basically worked out of the box with the data dumped
into MongoDB by `synth`. This gave us all the filtering we needed basically for
free.

Then we wrote a quick and dirty express server that maps the REST endpoint's

> querytstrings into a query for prisma. The whole thing turned out to be ~90 LOC.

Reviewer: Typo

whole thing in a single Docker container. It seemed like the best trade-off
between goals 1 and 2.

There were 6 steps to getting this thing over the line:

1. Start with the MongoDB base image. This gives us a Linux environment and a
   database.
2. Download and install NodeJS runtime in the container.
3. Download and install `synth` in the container.
4. Copy the javascript sources over & the `synth` data model
5. Write a
   small [ENTRYPOINT](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#entrypoint) [shell script](https://github.com/getsynth/model-repository/blob/main/shopify/start.sh)
   to start the `mongod`, server and generate data into the server
6. Start the server and expose port 3000

And we're done! We've ~~hackily~~ happily packaged our mock API in a platform
agnostic one liner.

## Was it a success?

An important aspect of this experiment was to see if we could conceive,
research, design and implement a PoC in a week (as a side project, we were 
working on `synth` at the same time). I can safely say this was a 
success! We got it done to spec. 

An interesting thing to note is that **60%** of the time was spent on 

> ideating, researching and planing - and only 40% of the time on the actual

Reviewer: Typo
